## Introduction

Pediatric brain and spinal cord tumors are collectively the second most common malignancy in children after leukemia, and they represent the leading disease-related cause of death in children [@doi:10.1093/neuonc/noz150].
Five-year survival rates vary widely across different histologic and molecular classifications of brain tumors.
For example, most high-grade gliomas carry a universally fatal prognosis, while children with pilocytic astrocytoma have an estimated 10-year survival rate of 92% [@doi:10.1093/neuonc/now207].
Moreover, estimates from 2009 suggest that children and adolescents aged 0-19 with brain tumors in the United States have lost an average of 47,631 years of potential life [@doi:10.1002/cam4.410].

The low survival rates for some pediatric tumors are clearly multifactorial, explained partly by our lack of comprehensive understanding of the ever-evolving array of brain tumor molecular subtypes, difficulty drugging these tumors, and the shortage of drugs specifically labeled for pediatric malignancies.
Historically, some of the most fatal, inoperable brain tumors, such as diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomas, were not routinely biopsied due to perceived risks of biopsy and the paucity of therapeutic options that would require tissue.
Limited access to tissue to develop patient-derived cell lines and mouse models has been a barrier to research.
Furthermore, the incidence of any single brain tumor molecular subtype is relatively low due to the rarity of pediatric tumors in general.

To address these long-standing barriers, multiple national and international consortia have come together to collaboratively share specimens and data to accelerate breakthroughs and clinical translation.
The creation of the Pediatric Brain Tumor Atlas (PBTA) in 2018, led by the Children's Brain Tumor Network (CBTN) and the Pacific Pediatric Neuro-Oncology Consortium (PNOC), was one such effort.
Just as cooperation is required to share specimens and data, rigorous cancer genomic analysis requires collaboration among researchers with distinct expertise, such as computational scientists, bench scientists, clinicians, and pathologists.

Although there has been significant progress in recent years to elucidate the landscape of somatic variation responsible for pediatric brain tumor formation and progression, translation of therapeutic agents to phase II or III clinical trials and subsequent FDA approvals have not kept pace.
Within the last 20 years, the FDA has approved only five drugs for the treatment of pediatric brain tumors: mTOR inhibitor, everolimus, for subependymal giant cell astrocytoma [@doi:10.1097/01.COT.0000421359.88140.a8; @url:https://www.fda.gov/drugs/resources-information-approved-drugs/fda-approves-everolimus-tuberous-sclerosis-complex-associated-partial-onset-seizures]; anti-PD-1 immunotherapy, pembrolizumab, for microsatellite instability–high or mismatch repair–deficient tumors [@url:https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-approvals-and-databases/fda-approves-pembrolizumab-adults-and-children-tmb-h-solid-tumors]; NTRK inhibitors larotrectinib [@url:https://www.fda.gov/drugs/fda-approves-larotrectinib-solid-tumors-ntrk-gene-fusions] and entrectinib [@url:https://www.fda.gov/drugs/resources-information-approved-drugs/fda-approves-entrectinib-ntrk-solid-tumors-and-ros-1-nsclc] for tumors with an NTRK 1/2/3 gene fusions; MEK1/2 inhibitor, selumetinib, for neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) and symptomatic, inoperable plexiform neurofibromas [@url:https://www.fda.gov/drugs/resources-information-approved-drugs/fda-approves-selumetinib-neurofibromatosis-type-1-symptomatic-inoperable-plexiform-neurofibromas].
<!--TODO: Now that this introduction is longer, would we consider using the same citations to refer to the five FDA-approved drugs without listing them all out?-->
This is, in part, due to pharmaceutical company priorities and concerns regarding toxicity, making it challenging for researchers to obtain to new therapeutic agents for pediatric clinical trials.
Critically, as of August 18, 2020, an amendment to the Pediatric Research Equity Act called the "Research to Accelerate Cures and Equity (RACE) for Children Act" mandates that all new adult oncology drugs also be tested in children when the molecular targets are relevant to a particular childhood cancer.
The regulatory change introduced by the RACE Act, coupled with the identification of putative molecular targets in pediatric cancers through genomic characterization, is poised to accelerate identification of novel and effective therapeutic for pediatric diseases that have otherwise been overlooked.

To leverage diverse scientific and analytical expertise to analyze the PBTA data, we created an open science model and incorporated features, such as analytical code review [@doi:10.1093/aje/kwab092; @doi:10.7287/peerj.preprints.3210v1] and continuous integration to test data and code [@doi:10.1038/nbt.3780; @doi:10.7287/peerj.preprints.3210v1], to improve reproducibility throughout the life cycle of our project, termed OpenPBTA.
We anticipated that a model of open collaboration would enhance the value of our effort to the pediatric brain tumor research community.
Openly sharing data and code in real time allows others to build upon our work more rapidly, and publications that include data and code sharing may have a greater impact [@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000308; @doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008867].
Here, we present a comprehensive, collaborative, open genomic analysis of 1,043 tumors and 22 cell lines, comprised of 58 distinct brain tumor histologies from 943 patients.
These analyses can be used to support the RACE Act in rational clinical trial design to include children with brain tumors.
