## Results

### Crowd-sourced Somatic Analyses to Create an Open Pediatric Brain Tumor Atlas

We previously performed whole genome sequencing (WGS), whole exome sequencing (WXS), and RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) on matched tumor and normal tissues as well as selected cell lines [@doi:10.1093/neuonc/noz192] from 943 patients from the Pediatric Brain Tumor Atlas (PBTA), consisting of 911 patients from the [Children’s Brain Tumor Network (CBTN)](https://CBTN.org) [@doi:10.1016/j.neo.2022.100846] and 32 patients from the [Pacific Pediatric Neuro-Oncology Consortium (PNOC)](https://pnoc.us/) [@doi:10.1002/ijc.32258; @doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-22-0803] (**Figure {@fig:Fig1}A**).
We then harnessed, and built upon, the benchmarking efforts of the [Gabriella Miller Kids First Data Resource Center](https://kidsfirstdrc.org/) to develop robust and reproducible data analysis workflows within the CAVATICA platform to perform primary somatic analyses including calling of single nucleotide variants (SNVs), copy number variants (CNVs), structural variants (SVs), and gene fusions, often implementing multiple complementary methods  (**Figure {@fig:S1}**) and **STAR Methods**).

To facilitate analysis and visualization of this large, diverse cohort, we further categorized 2016 World Health Organization (WHO) broad tumor histologies [@doi:10.1007/s00401-016-1545-1] into smaller groupings we denote "cancer groups."
A summarized view of the number of biospecimens per phase of therapy across different broad histologies and cancer groups is shown in (**Figure {@fig:Fig1}B**).
We maintained a data release folder on Amazon S3, downloadable directly from S3 or through the open-access [CAVATICA project](https://www.cavatica.org/), with merged files for each analysis (See **Data and code availability** section).
As we produced new results (e.g., tumor mutation burden calculations) that we expected to be used across multiple analyses, or identified data issues, we created new data releases in a versioned manner.
We reran all manuscript-specific analysis modules with the latest data release (v23) prior to submission and subsequently created a GitHub repository-tagged release to ensure reproducibility.

A key innovative feature of this project has been its open contribution model used for both analyses (i.e., analytical code) and scientific manuscript writing, a model which can be utilized by code contributors within individual scientific groups and/or through collaboration.
We created a public Github analysis repository ([https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-analysis](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-analysis)) to hold all code associated with analyses downstream of the Kids First Data Resource Center workflows and a GitHub manuscript repository ([https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-manuscript](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-manuscript)) with Manubot [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007128] integration to enable real-time manuscript creation using Markdown within GitHub.
With very few exceptions noted in their respective analysis module READMEs, most modules can be run locally, and since they are run in the project Docker&reg; [@https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/2600239.2600241] container, they can easily be scaled and/or used on an Amazon EC2 instance.
Importantly, all analyses and manuscript writing were conducted openly throughout the research project, allowing any researcher in the world the opportunity to contribute.

The process for analysis and manuscript contributions is outlined in **Figure {@fig:Fig1}C**.
First, a potential contributor would propose an analysis by filing an issue in the GitHub analysis repository.
Next, organizers for the project, or other contributors with expertise, had the opportunity to provide feedback about the proposed analysis (**Figure {@fig:Fig1}C**).
The contributor then made a copy (fork) of the analysis repository and added their proposed analysis code and results to their fork.
The contributor would formally request to include their analytical code and results to the main OpenPBTA analysis repository by filing a pull request on GitHub.
All pull requests to the analysis repository underwent peer review by organizers and/or other contributors to ensure scientific accuracy, maintainability, and readability of code and  documentation (**Figure {@fig:Fig1}C-D**).
Importantly, this peer review process entailed two or more analysts running the same code within the same Docker&reg; [@https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/2600239.2600241] container to ensure reproducibility of results that were derived from a specific data release.

The collaborative nature of the project required additional steps beyond peer review of analytical code to ensure consistent results for all collaborators and over time (**Figure {@fig:Fig1}D**).
We leveraged Docker&reg; [@https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/2600239.2600241] and the Rocker project [@https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1710.03675] to maintain a consistent software development environment, creating a monolithic image that contained all dependencies necessary for analyses.
To ensure that new code would execute in the development environment, we used the continuous integration (CI) service CircleCI&reg; to run analytical code on a small subset of data for testing before formal code review, allowing us to detect code bugs or sensitivity to changes in the underlying data.

We followed a similar process in our Manubot-powered [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007128] manuscript repository for additions to the manuscript (**Figure {@fig:Fig1}C**).
Contributors forked the manuscript repository, added proposed content to their branch, and filed pull requests to the main manuscript repository with their changes.
Similarly, pull requests underwent a peer review process for clarity and correctness, agreement with interpretation, and spell checking via Manubot.

![**Overview of the OpenPBTA Project.** A, The Children's Brain Tumor Network and the Pacific Pediatric Neuro-Oncology Consortium collected tumors from 943 patients. To date, 22 cell lines were created from tumor tissue, and over 2000 specimens were sequenced (N = 1035 RNA-Seq, N = 940 WGS, and N = 32 WXS or targeted panel). Data was harmonized by the Kids First Data Resource Center using an Amazon S3 framework within CAVATICA. B, Stacked bar plot summary of the number of biospecimens per phase of therapy. Each panel denotes a broad histology and each bar denotes a cancer group. (Abbreviations: GNG = ganglioglioma, Other LGG = other low-grade glioma, PA = pilocytic astrocytoma, PXA = pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma, SEGA = subependymal giant cell astrocytoma, DIPG = diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma, DMG = diffuse midline glioma, Other HGG = other high-grade glioma, ATRT = atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor, MB = medulloblastoma, Other ET = other embryonal tumor, EPN = ependymoma, PNF = plexiform neurofibroma, DNET = dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumor, CRANIO = craniopharyngioma, EWS = Ewing sarcoma, CPP = choroid plexus papilloma). Only tumors with available descriptors were included. C, Overview of the open analysis and manuscript contribution model. In the analysis GitHub repository, a contributor would propose an analysis that other participants can comment on. Contributors would then implement the analysis and file a request to add their changes to the analysis repository ("pull request"). Pull requests underwent review for scientific rigor and correctness of implementation. Pull requests were additionally checked to ensure that all software dependencies were included and the code was not sensitive to underlying data changes using container and continuous integration technologies. Finally, a contributor would file a pull request documenting their methods and results to the Manubot-powered manuscript repository. Pull requests in the manuscript repository were also subject to review. D, A potential path for an analytical pull request. Arrows indicate revisions to a pull request. Prior to review, a pull request was tested for dependency installation and whether or not the code would execute. Pull requests also required approval by organizers and/or other contributors, who checked for scientific correctness. Panel A created with BioRender.com.](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-analysis/361fef09c574942d3d5ef0668461b37e3ee6cba6/figures/pngs/figure1.png?sanitize=true){#fig:Fig1 width="7in"}

### Molecular Subtyping of OpenPBTA CNS Tumors

Over the past two decades, experts in neuro-oncology have worked with the WHO to iteratively redefine the classifications of central nervous system (CNS) tumors [@pmid:11895036; @doi:10.1007/s00401-007-0243-4].
More recently, in 2016 [@doi:10.1007/s00401-016-1545-1], molecular subtypes driven by genetic alterations have been integrated into these classifications.
In 2011, the Children’s Brain Tumor Tissue Consortium, now known as the Children’s Brain Tumor Network (CBTN), opened its protocol for brain tumor and matched normal sample collection.
Since the CBTN opened its collection protocol in 2011, before molecular data were integrated into classifications, the majority of the tumors within the OpenPBTA lacked molecular subtype annotations at the time of tissue collection.
Moreover, the OpenPBTA data does not yet feature methylation arrays which are increasingly used to inform molecular subtyping and cancer diagnosis.
Therefore, we created analysis modules to systematically consider key genomic features of tumor entities described by the WHO in 2016 or Ryall and colleagues [@doi:10.1016/j.ccell.2020.03.011] for low-grade gliomas (LGGs).
Coupled with clinician and pathologist review, we generated research-grade integrated diagnoses for 60% (644/1074) of tumors with high confidence (**Table S1**) without the requirement for methylation, a major innovation of this project. <!--SAMPLECOUNT-->
This allowed us to update cancer diagnoses to align with WHO classifications (e.g., tumors formerly ascribed primitive neuro-ectodermal tumor [PNET] diagnoses), discover rarer tumor entities within the OpenPBTA (e.g., H3-mutant ependymoma, meningioma with _YAP1::FAM118B_ fusion), as well as identify and correct data entry errors (e.g., an ETMR incorrectly entered as a medulloblastoma) and histologically mis-identified specimens (e.g., Ewing sarcoma sample labeled as a craniopharyngioma).
Uniquely, we used transcriptomic classification to subtype 122 medulloblastomas into SHH, WNT, Group 3, or Group 4 with `MedulloClassifier` [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008263] and `MM2S` [@doi:10.1186/s13029-016-0053-y], achieving accuracies of 95% (41/43) and 91% (39/43), respectively.
These 43 "true positive" subtypes were manually curated from pathology reports by two independent reviewers.

**Table {@tbl:Table1}** lists the number of tumors we subtyped within OpenPBTA, comprising low-grade gliomas (N = 290), high-grade gliomas (N = 141), embryonal tumors (N = 126), ependymomas (N = 33), tumors of sellar region (N = 27), mesenchymal non-meningothelial tumors (N = 11), glialneuronal tumors (N = 10), and chordomas (N = 6), where Ns represent unique tumors. <!--SAMPLECOUNT-->
For detailed methods, see **STAR Methods** and **Figure {@fig:S1}**.

| Broad histology group                   | OpenPBTA molecular subtype               | Patients | Tumors |
|-----------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|----------|--------|
| Chordoma                                | CHDM, conventional                       | 2        | 2      |
| Chordoma                                | CHDM, poorly differentiated              | 2        | 4      |
| Embryonal tumor                         | CNS Embryonal, NOS                       | 13       | 13     |
| Embryonal tumor                         | CNS HGNET-MN1                            | 1        | 1      |
| Embryonal tumor                         | CNS NB-FOXR2                             | 2        | 3      |
| Embryonal tumor                         | ETMR, C19MC-altered                      | 5        | 5      |
| Embryonal tumor                         | ETMR, NOS                                | 1        | 1      |
| Embryonal tumor                         | MB, Group3                               | 14       | 14     |
| Embryonal tumor                         | MB, Group4                               | 48       | 49     |
| Embryonal tumor                         | MB, SHH                                  | 24       | 30     |
| Embryonal tumor                         | MB, WNT                                  | 10       | 10     |
| Ependymoma                         | EPN, H3 K28                              | 1        | 1      |
| Ependymoma                         | EPN, ST RELA                             | 25       | 28     |
| Ependymoma                         | EPN, ST YAP1                             | 3        | 4      |
| High-grade glioma                       | DMG, H3 K28                              | 18       | 24     |
| High-grade glioma                       | DMG, H3 K28, TP53 activated              | 10       | 13     |
| High-grade glioma                       | DMG, H3 K28, TP53 loss                   | 30       | 40     |
| High-grade glioma                       | HGG, H3 G35                              | 3        | 3      |
| High-grade glioma                       | HGG, H3 G35, TP53 loss                   | 1        | 1      |
| High-grade glioma                       | HGG, H3 wildtype                         | 26       | 31     |
| High-grade glioma                       | HGG, H3 wildtype, TP53 activated         | 5        | 5      |
| High-grade glioma                       | HGG, H3 wildtype, TP53 loss              | 14       | 21     |
| High-grade glioma                       | HGG, IDH, TP53 activated                 | 1        | 2      |
| High-grade glioma                       | HGG, IDH, TP53 loss                      | 1        | 1      |
| Low-grade glioma                        | GNG, BRAF V600E                          | 13       | 13     |
| Low-grade glioma                        | GNG, BRAF V600E, CDKN2A/B                | 1        | 1      |
| Low-grade glioma                        | GNG, FGFR                                | 1        | 1      |
| Low-grade glioma                        | GNG, H3                                  | 1        | 1      |
| Low-grade glioma                        | GNG, IDH                                 | 1        | 2      |
| Low-grade glioma                        | GNG, KIAA1549-BRAF                       | 5        | 5      |
| Low-grade glioma                        | GNG, MYB/MYBL1                           | 1        | 1      |
| Low-grade glioma                        | GNG, NF1-germline                        | 1        | 1      |
| Low-grade glioma                        | GNG, NF1-somatic, BRAF V600E             | 1        | 1      |
| Low-grade glioma                        | GNG, other MAPK                          | 4        | 4      |
| Low-grade glioma                        | GNG, other MAPK, IDH                     | 1        | 1      |
| Low-grade glioma                        | GNG, RTK                                 | 2        | 3      |
| Low-grade glioma                        | GNG, wildtype                            | 14       | 14     |
| Low-grade glioma                        | LGG, BRAF V600E                          | 25       | 27     |
| Low-grade glioma                        | LGG, BRAF V600E, CDKN2A/B                | 5        | 5      |
| Low-grade glioma                        | LGG, FGFR                                | 8        | 8      |
| Low-grade glioma                        | LGG, IDH                                 | 3        | 3      |
| Low-grade glioma                        | LGG, KIAA1549-BRAF                       | 106      | 113    |
| Low-grade glioma                        | LGG, KIAA1549-BRAF, NF1-germline         | 1        | 1      |
| Low-grade glioma                        | LGG, KIAA1549-BRAF, other MAPK           | 1        | 1      |
| Low-grade glioma                        | LGG, MYB/MYBL1                           | 2        | 2      |
| Low-grade glioma                        | LGG, NF1-germline                        | 6        | 6      |
| Low-grade glioma                        | LGG, NF1-germline, CDKN2A/B              | 1        | 1      |
| Low-grade glioma                        | LGG, NF1-germline, FGFR                  | 1        | 2      |
| Low-grade glioma                        | LGG, NF1-somatic                         | 2        | 2      |
| Low-grade glioma                        | LGG, NF1-somatic, FGFR                   | 1        | 1      |
| Low-grade glioma                        | LGG, NF1-somatic, NF1-germline, CDKN2A/B | 1        | 1      |
| Low-grade glioma                        | LGG, other MAPK                          | 11       | 12     |
| Low-grade glioma                        | LGG, RTK                                 | 8        | 10     |
| Low-grade glioma                        | LGG, RTK, CDKN2A/B                       | 1        | 1      |
| Low-grade glioma                        | LGG, wildtype                            | 33       | 34     |
| Low-grade glioma                        | SEGA, RTK                                | 1        | 1      |
| Low-grade glioma                        | SEGA, wildtype                           | 10       | 11     |
| Mesenchymal non-meningothelial tumor    | EWS                                      | 9        | 11     |
| Neuronal and mixed neuronal-glial tumor | CNC                                      | 2        | 2      |
| Neuronal and mixed neuronal-glial tumor | EVN                                      | 1        | 1      |
| Neuronal and mixed neuronal-glial tumor | GNT, BRAF V600E                          | 1        | 1      |
| Neuronal and mixed neuronal-glial tumor | GNT, KIAA1549-BRAF                       | 1        | 2      |
| Neuronal and mixed neuronal-glial tumor | GNT, other MAPK                          | 1        | 1      |
| Neuronal and mixed neuronal-glial tumor | GNT, other MAPK, FGFR                    | 1        | 1      |
| Neuronal and mixed neuronal-glial tumor | GNT, RTK                                 | 1        | 2      |
| Tumor of sellar region                  | CRANIO, ADAM                             | 27       | 27     |
|                                         | Total                                    | 577      | 644    |

Table: **Molecular subtypes generated through the OpenPBTA project.** Listed are broad tumor histologies, molecular subtypes generated, and number of patients and tumors subtyped within the OpenPBTA project. {#tbl:Table1}

### Somatic Mutational Landscape of Pediatric Brain Tumors

We performed a comprehensive genomic analysis of somatic SNVs, CNVs, SVs, and fusions across 1,074 tumors (N = 1,019 RNA-Seq, N = 918 WGS, N = 32 WXS/Panel) and 22 cell lines (N = 16 RNA-Seq, N = 22 WGS), from 943 patients, 833 with paired normal specimens (N = 801 WGS, N = 32 WXS/Panel).
Tumor purity across the PBTA was high (median of 76%) and is plotted by cancer group in **Figure {@fig:S3}A**.
Unless otherwise noted, each analysis was performed for primary tumors using one tumor per patient.

<!--SAMPLECOUNT-->
Following SNV consensus calling (**Figure {@fig:S1}** and **Figure {@fig:S2}A-G**), we observed as expected lower tumor mutation burden (TMB) **Figure {@fig:S2}H** in pediatric tumors compared to adult brain tumors from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), **Figure {@fig:S2}I**, with hypermutant (> 10 Mut/Mb) and ultra-hypermutant (> 100 Mut/Mb) tumors [@pmid:29056344] only found within HGGs.
**Figure {@fig:Fig2}** and **Figure {@fig:S3}A** depict oncoprints recapitulating known histology-specific driver genes in primary tumors across PBTA histologies.

<!-- TODO: Update group-specific count numbers below with figure update -->
#### Low-grade gliomas
As expected, the majority (62%, 140/227) of LGGs harbored a somatic alteration in _BRAF_, with canonical _BRAF::KIAA1549_ fusions as the major oncogenic driver [@doi:10.1186/s40478-020-00902-z] (**Figure {@fig:Fig2}A**). <!--SAMPLECOUNT-->
We observed additional mutations in _FGFR1_ (2%), _PIK3CA_ (2%), _KRAS_ (2%), _TP53_ (1%), and _ATRX_ (1%) and fusions in _NTRK2_ (2%), _RAF1_ (2%), _MYB_ (1%), _QKI_ (1%), _ROS1_ (1%), and _FGFR2_ (1%), concordant with previous studies reporting the near universal upregulation of the RAS/MAPK pathway in these tumors resulting from activating mutations and/or oncogenic fusions [@doi:10.1186/s40478-020-00902-z; @doi:10.1016/j.ccell.2020.03.011].
Indeed, we observed significant upregulation (ANOVA Bonferroni-corrected p < 0.01) of the KRAS signaling pathway in LGGs (**Figure {@fig:Fig5}B**).

#### Embryonal tumors
 <!--SAMPLECOUNT-->
The majority (N = 95) of embryonal tumors were medulloblastomas that spanned the spectrum of molecular subtypes (WNT, SHH, Group3, and Group 4; see **Molecular Subtyping of CNS Tumors**), as identified by subtype-specific canonical mutations (**Figure {@fig:Fig2}B**).
We detected canonical _SMARCB1/SMARCA4_ deletions or inactivating mutations in atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumors (ATRTs) and C19MC amplification in the embryonal tumors with multilayer rosettes (ETMRs, displayed as other embryonal tumors) [@doi:10.1007/s00401-020-02182-2; @doi:10.1093/neuonc/noab178; @doi:10.1186/s40478-020-00984-9; @doi:10.1038/nature22973].

#### High-grade gliomas
<!--SAMPLECOUNT-->
Across HGGs, we found that _TP53_ (57%, 35/61) and _H3F3A_ (52%, 32/61) were both most mutated and co-occurring genes (**Figure {@fig:Fig2}A and C**), followed by frequent mutations in _ATRX_ (30%, 18/61), a gene commonly mutated in gliomas [@doi:10.1080/14728222.2018.1487953].
We observed recurrent amplifications and fusions in _EGFR_, _MET_, _PDGFRA_, and _KIT_, highlighting that these tumors utilize multiple oncogenic mechanisms to activate tyrosine kinases, as has been previously reported [@doi:10.1002/ijc.32258; @doi:10.1016/j.ccell.2017.08.017; @doi:10.1186/s40478-020-00905-w].
Gene set enrichment analysis showed upregulation (ANOVA Bonferroni-corrected p < 0.01) of DNA repair, G2M checkpoint, and MYC pathways as well as downregulation of the TP53 pathway (**Figure {@fig:Fig5}B**).
The two tumors with ultra-high TMB (> 100 Mutations/Mb) were from patients with known mismatch repair deficiency syndrome [@doi:10.1093/neuonc/noz192].

#### Other CNS tumors
<!--SAMPLECOUNT-->
We observed that 25% (15/60) of ependymoma tumors were _C11orf95::RELA_ (now, _ZFTA::RELA_) fusion-positive ependymomas [@:doi.org/10.1038/nature13109] and that 68% (21/31) of craniopharyngiomas were driven by mutations in _CTNNB1_ (**Figure {@fig:Fig2}D**).
Multiple histologies contained somatic mutations or fusions in _NF2_, including 41% (7/17) of meningiomas, 5% (3/60) of ependymomas, and 27% (3/11) schwannomas.
We observed rare fusions in _ERBB4_, _YAP1_, _KRAS_, and _MAML2_ in 10% (6/60) of ependymoma tumors.
DNETs harbored alterations in MAPK/PI3K pathway genes, as has been previously reported [@doi:10.1093/jnen/nlz101], including _FGFR1_ (21%, 4/19), _PDGFRA_ (10%, 2/19), and _BRAF_ (5%, 1/19).
Frequent mutations in additional rare brain tumor histologies are depicted in **Figure {@fig:S3}A**.

![**Mutational landscape of PBTA tumors.** Shown are frequencies of canonical somatic gene mutations, CNVs, fusions, and TMB (top bar plot) for the top 20 genes mutated across primary tumors within the OpenPBTA dataset. A, Low-grade astrocytic tumors (N = 227): pilocytic astrocytoma (N = 104), other low-grade glioma (N = 69), ganglioglioma (N = 35), pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma (N = 9), subependymal giant cell astrocytoma (N = 10); B, Embryonal tumors (N = 128): medulloblastomas (N = 95), atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumors (N = 24), other embryonal tumors (N = 9); C, Diffuse astrocytic and oligodendroglial tumors (N = 61): diffuse midline gliomas (N = 34) and other high-grade gliomas (N = 27); D, Other CNS tumors (N = 194): ependymomas (N = 60), craniopharyngiomas (N = 31),  meningiomas (N = 17), dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumors (N = 19), Ewing sarcomas (N = 7), schwannomas (N = 11), and neurofibroma plexiforms (N = 7). Additional, rare CNS tumors are displayed in **Figure {@fig:S3}B**. Tumor histology (`Cancer Group`) and patient sex (`Germline sex estimate`) are displayed as annotations at the bottom of each plot. Only tumors with mutations in the listed genes are shown. Multiple CNVs are denoted as a complex event. N denotes the number of patients and tumors.](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-analysis/361fef09c574942d3d5ef0668461b37e3ee6cba6/figures/pngs/figure2.png?sanitize=true){#fig:Fig2 width="9in"}

<!--SAMPLECOUNT-->

### Mutational co-occurrence, CNV, and signatures highlight key oncogenic drivers

We analyzed mutational co-occurrence across the OpenPBTA, using a single tumor from each patient with available WGS (N = 666 patients). <!--SAMPLECOUNT-->
The top 50 mutated genes (see **STAR Methods** for details) in primary tumors are shown in **Figure {@fig:Fig3}** by tumor type (**A**, bar plots), with co-occurrence scores illustrated in the heatmap (**B**).
As expected, _TP53_ was the most frequently mutated gene across the OpenPBTA (8.4%, 56/666), significantly co-occurring with _H3F3A_ (OR = 32, 95% CI: 15.3 - 66.7, q = 8.46e-17), _ATRX_ (OR = 20, 95% CI: 8.4 - 47.7, q = 4.43e-8), _NF1_ (OR = 8.62, 95% CI: 3.7 - 20.2, q = 5.45e-5), and _EGFR_ (OR = 18.2, 95% CI: 5 - 66.5, q = 1.6e-4), with all of these driven by HGGs and consistent with previous reports [@doi:10.1016/j.ccell.2017.08.017; @doi:10.1093/neuonc/noaa251; @doi:10.1038/ng.2938].

In medulloblastoma tumors, mutations in _CTNNB1_ significantly co-occurred with mutations in _TP53_ (OR = 42.9, 95% CI: 7 - 261.4, q = 1.63e-3), as previously reported [@doi:10.1200/JCO.2010.31.1670], as well as with mutations in _DDX3X_ (OR = 21.1, 95% CI: 4.6 - 96.3, q = 4.46e-3), another commonly mutated gene in medulloblastomas [@doi:10.1038/nrc3410].
Mutations in _FGFR1_ and _PIK3CA_ significantly co-occurred in LGGs (OR = 76.1, 95% CI: 9.85 - 588.1, q = 3.26e-3), consistent with previous findings [@doi:10.1200/JCO.2010.31.1670; @doi:10.1186/s40478-020-01027-z].
Of HGG tumors with mutations in _TP53_ or _PPM1D_, 52/54 (96.3%) had mutations in only one of these genes (OR = 0.188, 95% CI: 0.04 - 0.94, p = 0.0413, q = 0.0587).
This trend recapitulates previous observations that _TP53_ and _PPM1D_ mutations tend to be mutually exclusive in HGGs [@https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2938].

We summarized broad CNV and SV and observed that HGGs and DMGs, followed by medulloblastomas, had the most unstable genomes (**Figure {@fig:S3}C**).
By contrast, craniopharyngiomas and schwannomas generally lacked somatic CNV.
Together, these CNV patterns largely aligned with our estimates of tumor mutational burden (**Figure {@fig:S2}H**).
The breakpoint density estimated from SV and CNV data was significantly correlated across tumors (linear regression p = 1.08e-37) (**Figure {@fig:Fig3}C**) and as expected, the number of chromothripsis regions called increased as breakpoint density increased (**Figure {@fig:S3}D-E**).
We identified chromothripsis events in 28% (N = 11/39) of diffuse midline gliomas and in 40% (N = 19/48) of other HGGs (non-midline HGGs) (**Figure {@fig:Fig3}D**).
We also found evidence of chromothripsis in over 15% of sarcomas, PXAs, metastatic secondary tumors, chordomas, glial-neuronal tumors, germinomas, meningiomas, ependymomas, medulloblastomas, ATRTs, and other embryonal tumors, highlighting the genomic instability and complexity of these pediatric brain tumors.

We next assessed the contributions of eight previously identified adult CNS-specific mutational signatures from the RefSig database [@doi:10.1038/s43018-020-0027-5] across tumors (**Figure {@fig:Fig3}E** and **Figure {@fig:S4}A**).
Stage 0 and/or 1 tumors characterized by low TMBs (**Figure {@fig:S2}H**) such as pilocytic astrocytomas, gangliogliomas, other LGGs, and craniopharyngiomas, were dominated by Signature 1 (**Figure {@fig:S4}A**), which results from the normal process of spontaneous deamination of 5-methylcytosine.
Signature N6 is a CNS-specific signature which we observed nearly universally across tumors.
Drivers of Signature 18, _TP53_, _APC_, _NOTCH1_ (found at https://signal.mutationalsignatures.com/explore/referenceCancerSignature/31/drivers), are also canonical drivers of medulloblastoma, and indeed, we observed Signature 18 as the signature with the highest weight in medulloblastoma tumors.
Signatures 3, 8, 18, and MMR2 were prevalent in HGGs, including DMGs.
Finally, we found that the Signature 1 weight was higher at diagnosis (pre-treatment) and was almost always lower in tumors at later phases of therapy (progression, recurrence, post-mortem, secondary malignancy; **Figure {@fig:S4}B**).
This trend may have resulted from therapy-induced mutations that produced additional signatures (e.g., temozolomide treatment has been suggested to drive Signature 11 [@doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2014.07.052]), subclonal expansion, and/or acquisition of additional driver mutations during tumor progression, leading to higher overall TMBs and additional signatures.

<!-- To do: possibly explore gene mutations driving signature 8, specifically for meningiomas, and describe -->

![**Mutational co-occurrence and signatures highlight key oncogenic drivers.** A, Bar plot of occurrence and co-occurrence of nonsynonymous mutations for the 50 most commonly mutated genes across all tumor types, which are denoted as "Other" when there are fewer than 10 tumors per grouping; B, Co-occurrence and mutual exclusivity of nonsynonymous mutations between genes; The co-occurrence score is defined as $I(-\log_{10}(P))$ where $P$ is defined by Fisher's exact test and $I$ is 1 when mutations co-occur more often than expected and -1 when exclusivity is more common; C, The number of SV breaks significantly correlate with CNV breaks (Adjusted R = 0.436, p = 1.08e-37). D, Chromothripsis frequency across pediatric brain tumors for all cancer groups with N >= 3 tumors. E, Sina plots of RefSig signature weights for signatures 1, 11, 18, 19, 3, 8, N6, MMR2, and Other across cancer groups. Box plot represents 5% (lower whisker), 25% (lower box), 50% (median), 75% (upper box), and 95% (upper whisker) quantiles.](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-analysis/361fef09c574942d3d5ef0668461b37e3ee6cba6/figures/pngs/figure3.png?sanitize=true){#fig:Fig3 width="7in"}

### Transcriptomic Landscape of Pediatric Brain Tumors

#### Prediction of _TP53_ oncogenicity and telomerase activity

To understand the _TP53_ phenotype in each tumor, we ran a classifier previously trained on TCGA [@doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2018.03.076] to calculate a _TP53_ score and infer _TP53_ inactivation status.
We compared results of this classifier to "true positive" alterations derived using high-confidence SNVs, CNVs, SVs, and fusions in _TP53_.
Specifically, we annotated _TP53_ alterations as "activated" if tumors harbored one of p.R273C or p.R248W gain-of-function mutations [@doi:10.1038/ng0593-42], or "lost" if the given patient either had a Li Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) predisposition diagnosis, the tumor harbored a known hotspot mutation, or the tumor contained two hits (e.g. both SNV and CNV), which would suggest both alleles had been affected.
If the _TP53_ mutation did not reside within the DNA-binding domain or we did not detect any alteration in _TP53_, we annotate the tumor as "other," reflecting its unknown _TP53_ alteration status.
The classifier achieved a high accuracy (AUROC = 0.85) for rRNA-depleted, stranded tumors compared to randomly shuffled _TP53_ scores (**Figure {@fig:Fig4}A**).
By contrast, while this classifier has previously shown strong performance on poly-A data from both adult [@doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2018.03.076] tumors and pediatric patient-derived xenografts [@doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2019.09.071], it did not perform as well on the poly-A tumors in this cohort (AUROC = 0.62; **Figure {@fig:S5}A**).

While we expected that tumors annotated as "lost" would have higher _TP53_ scores than would tumors annotated as "other," we observed that tumors annotated as "activated" had similar _TP53_ scores to those annotated as "lost" (**Figure {@fig:Fig4}B**, Wilcoxon p = 0.92).
This result suggests that the classifier actually detects an oncogenic, or altered, _TP53_ phenotype (scores > 0.5) rather than solely _TP53_ inactivation, as interpreted previously [@doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2018.03.076].
Moreover, tumors with "activating" _TP53_ mutations showed higher _TP53_ expression compared to those with _TP53_ "loss" mutations (Wilcoxon p = 0.006, **Figure {@fig:Fig4}C**).
Tumor types with the highest median _TP53_ scores were those known to harbor somatic _TP53_ alterations and included DMGs, medulloblastomas, HGGs, DNETs, ependymomas, and craniopharyngiomas (**Figure {@fig:Fig4}D**), while gangliogliomas, LGGs, meningiomas, and schwannomas had the lowest median scores.

To further validate the classifier's accuracy, we assessed _TP53_ scores for patients with LFS, hypothesizing that all of these tumors would have high scores.
Indeed, we observed higher scores in 8/10 tumors from LFS patients (N = 8 patients)(**Table S3**).
Although we observed low _TP53_ scores in two tumors from LFS patients (BS_DEHJF4C7 with a score of 0.09 and BS_ZD5HN296 with a score of 0.28), we confirmed from pathology reports that both patients were diagnosed with LFS and had a pathogenic germline variant in _TP53_.
In addition, the tumor purity of these two LFS tumors was low (16% and 37%, respectively), suggesting the classifier may require a certain level of tumor purity to achieve good performance, as we expect _TP53_ to be intact in normal cells.
These transcriptomic scores can be utilized to infer _TP53_ function in the absence of a predicted oncogenic _TP53_ alteration or DNA sequencing in general.

We used gene expression data to predict telomerase activity using EXpression-based Telomerase ENzymatic activity Detection (`EXTEND`) [@doi:10.1038/s41467-020-20474-9] as a surrogate measure of malignant potential [@doi:10.1038/s41467-020-20474-9; @doi:10.1093/carcin/bgp268], such that higher `EXTEND` scores suggest increased malignant potential.
While we did not find that tumors with _TERT_ promoter (TERTp) mutations (N = 6) had significantly higher telomerase activity scores than non-mutated tumors (Wilcoxon p-value = 0.1196), we observed that `EXTEND` scores significantly correlated with _TERC_ (R = 0.619, p < 0.01) and _TERT_ (R = 0.491, p < 0.01) expression (**Figure {@fig:S5}B-C**).
Since catalytically-active telomerase requires a combination of full-length _TERT_, _TERC_, as well as accessory proteins [@pmid:9751630], we expect that `EXTEND` scores may not be exclusively correlated with _TERT_ alterations and expression.
Next, we found aggressive tumors such as HGGs (DMGs and other high-grade gliomas) and MB had high `EXTEND` scores (**Figure {@fig:Fig4}D**), while low-grade lesions such as schwannomas, GNGs, DNETs, and other low-grade gliomas had among the lowest scores (**Table S3**).
These findings support previous reports of a more aggressive phenotype in tumors with higher telomerase activity [@doi:10.1007/s13277-016-5045-7; @doi:10.1038/labinvest.3700710; @doi:10.1007/s12032-016-0736-x; @doi:10.1111/j.1750-3639.2010.00372.x].

#### Hypermutant tumors share mutational signatures and have dysregulated **_TP53_**

We further investigated the mutational signature profiles of the hypermutant (TMB > 10 Mut/Mb; N = 3) and ultra-hypermutant (TMB > 100 Mut/Mb; N = 4) tumors and/or derived cell lines from six patients in the OpenPBTA cohort (**Figure {@fig:Fig4}E**).
Five of six tumors were diagnosed as HGGs and one was a brain metastasis of a MYCN non-amplified neuroblastoma tumor.
Signature 11, which is associated with exposure to temozolomide plus _MGMT_ promoter and/or mismatch repair deficiency [@doi:10.1038/s41588-019-0525-5], was indeed present in tumors with previous exposure to the drug (**Table {@tbl:Table2}**).
We detected the MMR2 signature in tumors of four patients (PT_0SPKM4S8, PT_3CHB9PK5, PT_JNEV57VK, and PT_VTM2STE3) diagnosed with either constitutional mismatch repair deficiency (CMMRD) or Lynch syndrome (**Table {@tbl:Table2}**), genetic predisposition syndromes caused by a variant in a mismatch repair gene such as _PMS2_, _MLH1_, _MSH2_, _MSH6_, or others [@doi:10.1136/jmedgenet-2020-107627].
Three of these patients harbored pathogenic germline variants in one of the aforementioned genes.
While we did not find a _known_ pathogenic variant in the germline of PT_VTM2STE3, this patient had a self-reported _PMS2_ variant noted in their pathology report and we did find 19 intronic variants of unknown significance (VUS) in _PMS2_.
This is not surprising since an estimated 49% of germline _PMS2_ variants in patients with CMMRD and/or Lynch syndrome are VUS [@doi:10.1136/jmedgenet-2020-107627].
Interestingly, while the cell line derived from patient PT_VTM2STE3's tumor at progression was not hypermutated (TMB = 5.7 Mut/Mb), it solely showed the MMR2 signature of the eight CNS signatures examined, suggesting selective pressure to maintain a mismatch repair (MMR) phenotype _in vitro_.
From patient PT_JNEV57VK, only one of the two cell lines derived from the progressive tumor was hypermutated (TMB = 35.9 Mut/Mb).
This hypermutated cell line was strongly weighted towards signature 11, while this patient's non-hypermutated cell line showed a number of lesser signature weights (1, 11, 18, 19, MMR2; Table S2), highlighting the plasticity of mutational processes and the need to carefully genomically characterize and select models for preclinical studies based on research objectives.

We observed that signature 18, which has been associated with high genomic instability and can lead to a hypermutator phenotype [@doi:10.1038/s43018-020-0027-5], was uniformly represented among hypermutant solid tumors.
Additionally, we found that all of the HGG tumors or cell lines had dysfunctional _TP53_ (**Table {@tbl:Table2}**), consistent with a previous report showing _TP53_ dysregulation is a dependency in tumors with high genomic instability [@doi:10.1038/s43018-020-0027-5].
With one exception, hypermutant and ultra-hypermutant tumors had high _TP53_ scores (> 0.5) and telomerase activity.
Interestingly, none of the hypermutant tumors showed evidence of signature 3 (present in homologous recombination deficient tumors), signature 8 (arises from double nucleotide substitutions/unknown etiology), or signature N6 (a universal CNS tumor signature).
The mutual exclusivity of signatures 3 and MMR2 corroborates a previous report suggesting tumors do not tend to feature both deficient homologous repair and mismatch repair [@doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2018.03.076].


| Kids First Participant ID | Kids First Biospecimen ID | CBTN ID   | Phase of therapy  | Composition       | Therapy post-biopsy                              | Cancer predisposition | Pathogenic germline variant                   | TMB   | OpenPBTA molecular subtype         |
|---------------------------|---------------------------|-----------|-------------------|-------------------|--------------------------------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-------|------------------------------------|
| PT_0SPKM4S8               | BS_VW4XN9Y7               | 7316-2640 | Initial CNS Tumor | Solid Tissue      | Radiation, Temozolomide, CCNU                    | None documented       | NM_000535.7(PMS2):c.137G>T (p.Ser46Ile) (LP)  | 187.4 | HGG, H3 wildtype, TP53 activated   |
| PT_3CHB9PK5               | BS_20TBZG09               | 7316-515  | Initial CNS Tumor | Solid Tissue      | Radiation, Temozolomide, Irinotecan, Bevacizumab | CMMRD                 | NM_000179.3(MSH6):c.3439-2A>G (LP)            | 307   | HGG, H3 wildtype, TP53 loss        |
| PT_3CHB9PK5               | BS_8AY2GM4G               | 7316-2085 | Progressive       | Solid Tissue      | Radiation, Temozolomide, Irinotecan, Bevacizumab | CMMRD                 | NM_000179.3(MSH6):c.3439-2A>G (LP)            | 321.6 | HGG, H3 wildtype, TP53 loss        |
| PT_EB0D3BXG               | BS_F0GNWEJJ               | 7316-3311 | Progressive       | Solid Tissue      | Radiation, Nivolumab                             | None documented       | None detected                                 | 26.3  | Metastatic NBL, MYCN non-amplified |
| PT_JNEV57VK               | BS_85Q5P8GF               | 7316-2594 | Initial CNS Tumor | Solid Tissue      | Radiation, Temozolomide                          | Lynch Syndrome        | NM_000251.3(MSH2):c.1906G>C (p.Ala636Pro) (P) | 4.7   | DMG, H3 K28, TP53 loss             |
| PT_JNEV57VK               | BS_HM5GFJN8               | 7316-3058 | Progressive       | Derived Cell Line | Radiation, Temozolomide, Nivolumab               | Lynch Syndrome        | NM_000251.3(MSH2):c.1906G>C (p.Ala636Pro) (P) | 35.9  | DMG, H3 K28, TP53 loss             |
| PT_JNEV57VK               | BS_QWM9BPDY               | 7316-3058 | Progressive       | Derived Cell Line | Radiation, Temozolomide, Nivolumab               | Lynch Syndrome        | NM_000251.3(MSH2):c.1906G>C (p.Ala636Pro) (P) | 7.4   | DMG, H3 K28, TP53 loss             |
| PT_JNEV57VK               | BS_P0QJ1QAH               | 7316-3058 | Progressive       | Solid Tissue      | Radiation, Temozolomide, Nivolumab               | Lynch Syndrome        | NM_000251.3(MSH2):c.1906G>C (p.Ala636Pro) (P) | 6.3   | DMG, H3 K28, TP53 activated        |
| PT_S0Q27J13               | BS_P3PF53V8               | 7316-2307 | Initial CNS Tumor | Solid Tissue      | Radiation, Temozolomide, Irinotecan              | None documented       | None detected                                 | 15.5  | HGG, H3 wildtype, TP53 activated   |
| PT_VTM2STE3               | BS_ERFMPQN3               | 7316-2189 | Progressive       | Derived Cell Line | Unknown                                          | Lynch Syndrome        | None detected                                 | 5.7   | HGG, H3 wildtype, TP53 loss        |
| PT_VTM2STE3               | BS_02YBZSBY               | 7316-2189 | Progressive       | Solid Tissue      | Unknown                                          | Lynch Syndrome        | None detected                                 | 274.5 | HGG, H3 wildtype, TP53 activated   |


Table: **Patients with hypermutant tumors.** Listed are patients with at least one hypermutant or ultra-hypermutant tumor or cell line. Pathogenic (P) or likely pathogenic (LP) germline variants, coding region TMB, phase of therapy, therapeutic interventions, cancer predisposition (CMMRD = Constitutional mismatch repair deficiency), and molecular subtypes are included. {#tbl:Table2}

Next, we asked whether transcriptomic classification of _TP53_ dysregulation and/or telomerase activity recapitulate the known prognostic influence of these oncogenic biomarkers.
To this end, we conducted a multivariate Cox regression on overall survival (**Figure {@fig:Fig4}F**; **STAR Methods**), controlling for extent of tumor resection and whether a tumor was low-grade (LGG group) or high-grade glioma (HGG group).
We identified several expected trends, including a significant overall survival benefit if the tumor had been fully resected (HR = 0.35, 95% CI = 0.2 - 0.62, p < 0.001) or if the tumor belonged to the LGG group (HR = 0.046, 95% CI = 0.0062 - 0.34, p = 0.003) as well as a significant risk if the tumor belonged to the HGG group (HR = 6.2, 95% CI = 4.0 - 9.5, p < 0.001).
High telomerase scores were associated with poor prognosis across brain tumor histologies (HR = 20, 95% CI = 6.4 - 62, p < 0.001), demonstrating that `EXTEND` scores calculated from RNA-Seq are an effective rapid surrogate measure for telomerase activity.
Although higher _TP53_ scores, which predict _TP53_ gene or pathway dysregulation, were not a significant predictor of risk across the entire OpenPBTA cohort (**Table S4**), we did find a significant survival risk associated with higher _TP53_ scores within DMGs (HR = 6436, 95% CI = 2.67 - 1.55e7, p = 0.03) and ependymomas (HR = 2003, 95% CI = 9.9 - 4.05e5, p = 0.005).
Since we observed the negative prognostic effect of _TP53_ scores for HGGs, we assessed the effect of molecular subtypes within HGGs on survival risk.
We found that DMG H3 K28 tumors with _TP53_ loss had significantly worse prognosis (HR = 2.8, CI = 1.4-5.6, p = 0.003) than did DMG H3 K28 tumors with wildtype _TP53_ (**Figure {@fig:Fig4}G** and **Figure {@fig:Fig4}H**).
This finding was also recently reported in two recent restrospective analyses of DIPG tumors [@doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-22-0803; @doi:10.1007/s11060-021-03890-9].

![**_TP53_ and telomerase activity** A, Receiver Operating Characteristic for _TP53_ classifier run on FPKM of stranded RNA-Seq tumors. B, Violin and strip plots of _TP53_ scores from stranded RNA-Seq tumors plotted by _TP53_ alteration type (N<sub>activated</sub> = 11, N<sub>lost</sub> = 100, N<sub>other</sub> = 866). C, Violin and strip plots of _TP53_ RNA expression from stranded RNA-Seq tumors plotted by _TP53_ activation status (N<sub>activated</sub> = 11, N<sub>lost</sub> = 100, N<sub>other</sub> = 866). D, Box plots of _TP53_ and telomerase (EXTEND) scores across cancer groups. Mutation status is highlighted in orange (hypermutant) or red (ultra-hypermutant). E, Heatmap of RefSig mutational signatures for patients who have least one tumor or cell line with a hypermutant phenotype. F, Forest plot depicting the prognostic effects of _TP53_ and telomerase scores on overall survival, controlling for extent of tumor resection, LGG group, and HGG group. G, Forest plot depicting the effect of molecular subtype on overall survival of HGGs. For F and G, hazard ratios (HR) with 95% confidence intervals and p-values (multivariate Cox) are listed. Significant p-values are denoted with black diamonds. Reference groups are denoted by grey diamonds. H, Kaplan-Meier curve of HGG tumors by molecular subtype. Box plot represents 5% (lower whisker), 25% (lower box), 50% (median), 75% (upper box), and 95% (upper whisker) quantiles.](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-analysis/361fef09c574942d3d5ef0668461b37e3ee6cba6/figures/pngs/figure4.png?sanitize=true){#fig:Fig4 width="7in"}

#### Histologic and oncogenic pathway clustering

UMAP visualization of gene expression variation across brain tumors (**Figure {@fig:Fig5}A**) showed the expected clustering of brain tumors by histology.
We additionally explored UMAP projections of gene expression within molecular subtypes for certain cancer groups.
We observed that, except for three outliers, _C11orf95::RELA_ (_ZFTA::RELA_) fusion-positive ependymomas fell within distinct clusters (**Figure {@fig:S6}A**).
Medulloblastoma (MB) tumors cluster by molecular subtype, with WNT and SHH in distinct clusters and Groups 3 and 4 showing some overlap (**Figure {@fig:S6}B**), as expected.
Of note, two MB tumors annotated as the SHH subtype did not cluster with the other MB tumors, and one clustered with Group 3 and 4 tumors, suggesting potential subtype misclassification or different underlying biology of these two tumors.
_BRAF_-driven low-grade gliomas (**Figure {@fig:S6}C**) were present in three separate clusters, suggesting that there might be additional shared biology within each cluster.
Histone H3 G35-mutant high-grade gliomas generally clustered together and away from K28-mutant tumors (**Figure {@fig:S6}D**).
Interestingly, although H3 K28-mutant tumors have different biological drivers than do H3 wildtype tumors [@doi:10.1126/science.1232245], they did not form distinct clusters.
This pattern suggests these subtypes may be driven by common transcriptional programs, have other much stronger biological drivers than their known distinct epigenetic drivers, or our sample size is too small to detect transcriptional differences.

We next performed gene set variant analysis (GSVA) for Hallmark cancer gene sets to demonstrate activation of underlying oncogenic pathways (**Figure {@fig:Fig5}B** and quantified immune cell fractions across OpenPBTA tumors using quanTIseq (**Figure {@fig:Fig5}C** and **Figure {@fig:S6}E**).
Through these analyses, we were able to recapitulate previously-described tumor biology.
For example, HGG, DMG, MB, and ATRT tumors are known to upregulate _MYC_ [@doi:10.3390/genes8040107] which in turn activates _E2F_ and S phase [@pmid:11511364].
Indeed, we detected significant (Bonferroni-corrected p < 0.05) upregulation of _MYC_ and _E2F_ targets, as well as G2M (cell cycle phase following S phase) in MBs, ATRTs, and HGGs compared to several other cancer groups.
In contrast, LGGs showed significant downregulation (Bonferroni-corrected p < 0.05) of these pathways.
Schwannomas and neurofibromas, which have a documented inflammatory immune microenvironment of T and B lymphocytes as well as tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs), are driven by upregulation of cytokines such as IFN$\gamma$, IL-1, and IL-6, and TNF$\alpha$ [@doi:10.1093/noajnl/vdaa023].
Indeed, we observed significant upregulation of these cytokines in GSVA hallmark pathways (Bonferroni-corrected p < 0.05) (**Figure {@fig:Fig5}B**) and found immune cell types dominated by monocytes in these tumors (**Figure {@fig:Fig5}C**).
We also observed significant upregulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines IFN$\alpha$ and IFN$\gamma$ in LGGs and craniopharyngiomas compared to medulloblastoma and ependymoma tumors (Bonferroni-corrected p < 0.05), both of which showed significant down-regulation of these cytokines (**Figure {@fig:Fig5}B**).
Together, these results supported previous proteogenomic findings of lower immune infiltration in aggressive medulloblastomas and ependymomas versus higher immune infiltration in _BRAF_-driven LGG and craniopharyngiomas [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.044].

Although CD8+ T-cell infiltration across all cancer groups was quite low (**Figure {@fig:Fig5}C**), we observed some signal in specific cancer molecular subtypes (Groups 3 and 4 medulloblastoma) as well as outlier tumors (BRAF-driven LGG, BRAF-driven and wildtype ganglioglioma, and CNS embryonal NOS; **Figure {@fig:S6}E**)
Surprisingly, the classically immunologically-cold HGG and DMG tumors [@doi:10.1186/s40478-018-0553-x; @doi:10.1093/brain/awab155] contained higher overall fractions of immune cells, where monocytes, dendritic cells, and NK cells were the most prevalent (**Figure {@fig:Fig5}C**).
Thus, we suspect that quanTIseq might actually have captured microglia within these immune cell fractions.

While we did not detect notable prognostic effects of immune cell infiltration on overall survival in HGG or DMG tumors, we did find that high levels of macrophage M1 and monocytes were associated with poorer overall survival (monocyte HR = 2.1e18, 95% CI = 3.80e5 - 1.2e31, p = 0.005, multivariate Cox) in medulloblastoma tumors (**Figure {@fig:Fig5}D**).
We further reproduced previous findings (**Figure {@fig:Fig5}E**) that medulloblastomas typically have low expression of _CD274_ (PD-L1) [@doi:10.18632/oncotarget.24951].
However, we also found that higher expression of _CD274_ was significantly associated with improved overall prognosis for medulloblastoma tumors, although with a marginal effect size (HR = 0.0012, 95% CI = 7.5e−06 - 0.18, p = 0.008, multivariate Cox) (**Figure {@fig:Fig5}D**).
This result may be explained by the higher expression of _CD274_ found in WNT subtype tumors by us and others [@doi:10.1080/2162402X.2018.1462430], as this diagnosis carries the best prognosis of all medulloblastoma subgroups (**Figure {@fig:Fig5}E**).

Finally, we asked whether any molecular subtypes might show an immunologically-hot phenotype, as roughly defined by a greater proportion of CD8+ to CD4+ T cells [@doi:10.1136/jitc-2021-004012; @doi:10.4236/jct.2013.48164].
While adamantinomatous craniopharyngiomas and Group 3 and Group 4 medulloblastomas had the highest CD8+ to CD4+ T cell ratios (**Figure {@fig:S6}F**), very few tumors had ratios greater than 1, highlighting an urgent need to identify novel therapeutics for these immunologically-cold pediatric brain tumors with poor prognosis.

![**Transcriptomic and immune landscape of pediatric brain tumors** A, First two dimensions from UMAP of transcriptome data for samples with stranded library preparation. Points are colored by the broad histology of the tumors they represent. B, Heatmap of GSVA scores for Hallmark gene sets with significant differences, with tumors ordered by cancer group (only scores for samples with stranded library preparation are shown). C, Box plots of quanTIseq estimates of immune cell proportions in select cancer groups with N > 15 tumors. Note: Other HGGs and other LGGs have immune cell proportions similar to DMG and pilocytic astrocytoma, respectively, and are not shown. D, Forest plot depicting the additive effects of _CD274_ expression, immune cell proportion, and extent of tumor resection on overall survival of medulloblastoma patients. Hazard ratios (HR) with 95% confidence intervals and p-values (multivariate Cox) are listed. Significant p-values are denoted with black diamonds. Reference groups are denoted by grey diamonds. Of note, the Macrophage M1 HR was 0 (coefficient = -9.90e+4) with infinite upper and lower CIs, and thus it was not included in the figure. E, Box plot of _CD274_ expression (log<sub>2</sub> FPKM) for medulloblastoma tumors grouped by molecular subtype. Bonferroni-corrected p-values from Wilcoxon tests are shown. Box plot represents 5% (lower whisker), 25% (lower box), 50% (median), 75% (upper box), and 95% (upper whisker) quantiles.](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-analysis/361fef09c574942d3d5ef0668461b37e3ee6cba6/figures/pngs/figure5.png?sanitize=true){#fig:Fig5 width="7in"}
