## Discussion

We created OpenPBTA to define an open, real-time, reproducible analysis framework to genomically characterize pediatric brain tumors that brings together basic and translational researchers, clinicians, and data scientists on behalf of accelerated discovery and clinical impact.
We provide robust reusable code and data resources, paired with cloud-based availability of source and derived data resources, to the pediatric oncology community, encouraging interdisciplinary scientists to collaborate on new analyses in order to accelerate therapeutic translation for children with cancer, goals we are seeing play out in real-time.
To our knowledge, this initiative represents the first large-scale, collaborative, open analysis of genomic data coupled with open manuscript writing, in which we comprehensively analyzed the largest cohort of pediatric brain tumors to date, comprising 1,074 tumors across 58 distinct histologies.
We used available WGS, WXS, and RNA-Seq data to generate high-confidence consensus SNV and CNV calls, prioritize putative oncogenic fusions, and establish over 40 scalable modules to perform common downstream cancer genomics analyses, all of which have undergone rigorous scientific and analytical code review.
We detected and showed expected patterns of genomic lesions, mutational signatures, and aberrantly regulated signaling pathways across multiple pediatric brain tumor histologies.

Assembling large, pan-histology cohorts of fresh frozen samples and associated clinical phenotypes and outcomes requires a multi-year, multi-institutional framework, like those provided by CBTN and PNOC. As such, uniform clinical molecular subtyping was largely not performed for most of this cohort at the time of diagnosis and/or at surgery, and when available (e.g., sparse medulloblastoma subtypes), it required manual curation from pathology reports and/or free text clinical data fields.
Furthermore, rapid classification to derive molecular subtypes could not be immediately performed since research-based DNA methylation data for these samples are not yet available.
Thus, to enable biological interrogation of specific tumor subtypes, we created RNA- and DNA-based subtyping modules aligned with WHO molecularly-defined diagnoses.
We worked closely with pathologists and clinicians to build modules from which we determined a research-grade integrated diagnosis for 60% of samples while discovering incorrectly diagnosed or mis-identified samples in the OpenPBTA cohort. <!--SAMPLECOUNT-->

We harnessed RNA expression data for a number of analyses, yielding important biological insights across multiple brain tumor histologies.
For example, we performed subtyping of medulloblastoma tumors, for which only 35% (43/122) had subtype information from pathology reports. <!--SAMPLECOUNT-->
Among the subtyped tumors, we accurately recapitulated subtypes using MM2S (91%; 39/43) or medulloPackage (95%; 41/43) [@doi:10.1186/s13029-016-0053-y; @doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008263]. <!--SAMPLECOUNT-->
We then applied the consensus of these methods to subtype all medulloblastoma tumors lacking pathology-based subtypes.

We advanced the integrative analyses and cross-cohort comparison via a number of validated modules.
We used an expression classifier to determine whether tumors have dysfunctional _TP53_ [@doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2018.03.076] and the EXTEND algorithm to determine their degree of telomerase activity using a 13-gene signature [@doi:10.1038/s41467-020-20474-9].
Interestingly, in contrast to adult colorectal cancer and gastric adenocarcinoma, in which _TP53_ loss of function is less frequent in hypermutated tumors [@doi:10.18632/oncotarget.22783; @https://doi.org/10.1038/NATURE13480], we found that hypermutant HGG tumors universally displayed dysregulation of _TP53_.
Furthermore, high _TP53_ scores were a significant prognostic marker for poor overall survival for patients with certain tumor types, such as H3 K28-altered DMGs and ependymomas.
We also show that EXTEND scores are a robust surrogate measure for telomerase activity in pediatric brain tumors.
By assessing _TP53_ and telomerase activity prospectively from expression data, information usually only attainable with DNA sequencing and/or qPCR, we can quickly incorporate oncogenic biomarker and prognostic knowledge and expand our biological understanding of these tumors.

We identified enrichment of hallmark cancer pathways and characterized the immune cell landscape across pediatric brain tumors, demonstrating tumors in some histologies, such as schwannomas, craniopharyngiomas, and low-grade gliomas, may have a inflammatory tumor microenvironment.
Of note, we observed upregulation of IFN$\gamma$, IL-1, and IL-6, and TNF$\alpha$ in craniopharyngiomas, tumors difficult to resect due to their anatomical location and critical surrounding structures.
Neurotoxic side effects have been reported when interferon alpha immunotherapy is administered to reduce cystic craniopharyngioma tumor size and/or delay progression [@doi:10.3171/2015.2.PEDS14656; @doi:10.5348/ijcri-2013-12-419-CR-13].
Thus, additional immune vulnerabilities, such as IL-6 inhibition and immune checkpoint blockade, have recently been proposed as therapies for cystic adamantinomatous craniopharyngiomas [@doi:10.1093/neuonc/noy035; @pmid:34966342; @pmid:32075140; @doi:10.1007/s00401-018-1830-2; @doi:10.3389/fonc.2019.00791] and our results noted above support this approach.
Finally, our study reproduced the overall known poor infiltration of CD8+ T cells and general low expression of _CD274_ (PD-L1) in pediatric brain tumors, further highlighting the urgent need to identify novel therapeutic strategies for these immunologically cold tumors.

OpenPBTA has rapidly become a foundational data analysis and processing layer for a number of discovery research and translational projects which will continue to add other genomic modalities and analyses, such as germline, methylation, single cell, epigenomic, mRNA splicing, imaging, and model drug response data.
For example, the RNA fusion filtering module created within OpenPBTA set the stage for development of the R package _annoFuse_ [@doi:10.1186/s12859-020-03922-7] and an R Shiny application [_shinyFuse_](http://shiny.imbei.uni-mainz.de:3838/shinyFuse/).
Using medulloblastoma subtyping and immune deconvolution analyses performed herein, Dang and colleagues showed enrichment of monocyte and microglia-derived macrophages within the SHH subgroup which they suggest may accumulate following radiation therapy [@doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2021.108917].
Expression and copy number analyses were used to demonstrate that _GPC2_ is a highly expressed and copy number gained immunotherapeutic target in ETMRs, medulloblastomas, choroid plexus carcinomas, H3 wildtype high-grade gliomas, as well as DMGs.
This led Foster and colleagues to subsequently develop a chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) directed against _GPC2_, for which they show preclinical efficacy in mouse models [@biorxiv:10.1101/2021.07.06.451385].
Moreover, OpenPBTA has enabled a framework to support real-time integration of clinical trial subjects as each was enrolled on the PNOC008 high-grade glioma clinical trial [@clinicaltrials:NCT03739372], allowing researchers and clinicians to link tumor biology to translational impact through clinical decision support during tumor board discussions.
Finally, as part of the the NCI's Childhood Cancer Data Initiative (CCDI), the OpenPBTA project was recently expanded into a pan-pediatric cancer effort ([https://github.com/PediatricOpenTargets/OpenPedCan-analysis](https://github.com/PediatricOpenTargets/OpenPedCan-analysis)) to build the Molecular Targets Platform ([https://moleculartargets.ccdi.cancer.gov/](https://moleculartargets.ccdi.cancer.gov/)) in support of the RACE Act.
An additional, large-scale cohort of >2,500 tumor samples and associated germline DNA is in the process of undergoing sequence data generation as part of CBTN CCDI-Kids First NCI and Common Fund project ([https://commonfund.nih.gov/kidsfirst/2021X01projects#FY21_Resnick](https://commonfund.nih.gov/kidsfirst/2021X01projects#FY21_Resnick)).
Like the original OpenPBTA cohort, data will be processed and released in near real-time via the Kids First Data Resource and integrated with OpenPBTA.
The OpenPBTA project has paved the way for new modes of collaborative data-driven discovery, open, reproducible, and scalable analyses that will extend beyond the current research described herein, and we anticipate this foundational work will continue to have a long-term impact within the pediatric brain tumor translational research community and beyond, ultimately leading to accelerated impact and improved outcomes for children with cancer.

All code and processed data are openly available through GitHub, CAVATICA, and PedcBioPortal (see **STAR METHODS**).
