## Acknowledgments

We graciously thank the patients and families who have donated tumors to CBTN and/or PNOC, without which this research would not be possible.

Philanthropic support has ensured the CBTN's ability to collect, store, manage, and distribute specimen and data.
The following donors have provided leadership level support for CBTN: CBTN Executive Council members, Brain Tumor Board of Visitors, Children's Brain Tumor Foundation, Easie Family Foundation, Kortney Rose Foundation, Lilabean Foundation, Minnick Family Charitable Fund, Perricelli Family, Psalm 103 Foundation, and Swifty Foundation.

This work was funded through the Alex’s Lemonade Stand Foundation (ALSF) Childhood Cancer Data Lab (CSG), ALSF Young Investigator Award (JLR), ALSF Catalyst Award (JLR, ACR, PBS), ALSF Catalyst Award (SJS), ALSF CCDL Postdoctoral Training Grant (SMF), Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia Division of Neurosurgery (PBS and ACR), Australian Government, Department of Education (APH), St. Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Austria (ARP), the Mildred Scheel Early Career Center  Dresden P2, funded by the German Cancer Aid (ARP), NIH Grants 3P30 CA016520-44S5 (ACR), U2C HL138346-03 (ACR, APH), U24 CA220457-03 (ACR), K12GM081259 (SMF), R03-CA23036 (SJD), NIH Contract Nos. HHSN261200800001E (SJD) and 75N91019D00024, Task Order No. 75N91020F00003 (JLR, ACR, APH), Intramural Research Program of the Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics of the National Cancer Institute
The content of this publication does not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the Department of Health and Human Services, nor does mention of trade names, commercial products or organizations imply endorsement by the U.S. Government.

The authors thank the following collaborators who contributed or supervised analyses present in the analysis repository that were not included in the manuscript: William Amadio, Holly C. Beale, Ellen T. Kephart, A. Geoffrey Lyle, and Olena M. Vaske.
Finally, we thank Yuanchao Zhang for adding to the project codebase, Jessica B. Foster for helpful discussions while drafting the manuscript, and Gina D. Mawla for identifying and reporting OpenPBTA data issues.

## Author Contributions

|Author|Contributions|
|---|---|{% for author in manubot.authors %}
|{{author.name}}|{% if author.contributions is string %}{{author.contributions}}{% else %}{% for contribution in author.contributions %}{{ contribution }}{% if not loop.last %}, {% endif %}{% endfor %}{% endif %}|{% endfor %}

Except for the first and last four authors, authorship order was determined as follows: Authors who contributed to the OpenPBTA code base are listed based on number of modules included in the manuscript to which that individual contributed and, in the case of ties, a random order is used. All remaining authors are then listed in a random order.

Code for determining authorship order can be found in the `count-contributions` module of the OpenPBTA analysis repository.

## Declarations of Interest

CSG's spouse was an employee of Alex's Lemonade Stand Foundation, which was a sponsor of this research.
JAS, CLS, CJB, SJS, and JNT are or were employees of Alex's Lemonade Stand Foundation, a sponsor of this research.
AJW is a member of the Scientific Advisory boards for Alexion and DayOne Biopharmaceuticals.

## Figure Titles and Legends

**Figure 1. Overview of the OpenPBTA Project.**
A, CBTN and PNOC collected tumors from 943 patients. 22 cell lines were created from tumor tissue, and over 2000 specimens were sequenced (N = 1035 RNA-Seq, N = 940 WGS, and N = 32 WXS or targeted panel). Data was harmonized by the Kids First Data Resource Center using an Amazon S3 framework within CAVATICA. B, Stacked bar plot summary of the number of biospecimens per phase of therapy. Each panel denotes a broad histology and each bar denotes a cancer group. (Abbreviations: GNG = ganglioglioma, Other LGG = other low-grade glioma, PA = pilocytic astrocytoma, PXA = pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma, SEGA = subependymal giant cell astrocytoma, DIPG = diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma, DMG = diffuse midline glioma, Other HGG = other high-grade glioma, ATRT = atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor, MB = medulloblastoma, Other ET = other embryonal tumor, EPN = ependymoma, PNF = plexiform neurofibroma, DNET = dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumor, CRANIO = craniopharyngioma, EWS = Ewing sarcoma, CPP = choroid plexus papilloma). Only tumors with available descriptors were included. C, Overview of the open analysis and manuscript contribution model. In the analysis GitHub repository, a contributor proposed an analysis, implemented it in their fork, and filed a pull request (PR) to add their changes to the analysis repository. PRs underwent review for scientific rigor and implementation correctness. Using container and continuous integration technologies, PRs were checked to ensure that all software dependencies were included and code was not sensitive to underlying data changes. Finally, a contributor filed a PR documenting their methods and results to the Manubot-powered manuscript repository for review. D, A potential path for an analytical PR. Arrows indicate revisions to a PR. Panel A created with [BioRender.com](biorender.com).

**Figure 2. Mutational landscape of PBTA tumors.**
Shown are frequencies of canonical somatic gene mutations, CNVs, fusions, and TMB (top bar plot) for the top mutated genes across primary tumors within the OpenPBTA dataset. A, Low-grade gliomas (N = 226): pilocytic astrocytoma (N = 104), other low-grade glioma (N = 68), ganglioglioma (N = 35), pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma (N = 9), subependymal giant cell astrocytoma (N = 10); B, Embryonal tumors (N = 129): medulloblastoma (N = 95), atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor (N = 24), other embryonal tumor (N = 10); C, High-grade gliomas (N = 63): diffuse midline glioma (N = 36) and other high-grade glioma (N = 27); D, Other CNS tumors (N = 153): ependymoma (N = 60), craniopharyngioma (N = 31), meningioma (N = 17), dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumor (N = 19), Ewing sarcoma (N = 7), schwannoma (N = 12), and neurofibroma plexiform (N = 7). Additional, rare CNS tumors are displayed in **Figure {@fig:S3}B**. Tumor histology (`Cancer Group`) and patient sex (`Germline sex estimate`) are displayed as annotations at the bottom of each plot. Only tumors with mutations in the listed genes are shown. Multiple CNVs are denoted as a complex event. N denotes the number of unique tumors with one tumor per patient used.

**Figure 3. Mutational co-occurrence and signatures highlight key oncogenic drivers.**
A, Bar plot of occurrence and co-occurrence of nonsynonymous mutations for the 50 most commonly mutated genes across all tumor types, which are denoted as "Other" when there are fewer than 10 tumors per grouping; B, Co-occurrence and mutual exclusivity of nonsynonymous mutations between genes; The co-occurrence score is defined as $I(-\log_{10}(P))$ where $P$ is defined by Fisher's exact test and $I$ is 1 when mutations co-occur more often than expected and -1 when exclusivity is more common; C, The number of SV breaks significantly correlate with CNV breaks (Adjusted R = 0.443, p = 1.05e-38). D, Chromothripsis frequency across pediatric brain tumors for all cancer groups with N >= 3 tumors. E, Sina plots of RefSig signature weights for signatures 1, 11, 18, 19, 3, 8, N6, MMR2, and Other across cancer groups. Box plot represents 5% (lower whisker), 25% (lower box), 50% (median), 75% (upper box), and 95% (upper whisker) quantiles.

**Figure 4. _TP53_ and telomerase activity**
A, Receiver Operating Characteristic for _TP53_ classifier run on FPKM of stranded RNA-Seq tumors. B, Violin and strip plots of _TP53_ scores from stranded RNA-Seq tumors plotted by _TP53_ alteration type (N<sub>activated</sub> = 11, N<sub>lost</sub> = 100, N<sub>other</sub> = 866). C, Violin and strip plots of _TP53_ RNA expression from stranded RNA-Seq tumors plotted by _TP53_ activation status (N<sub>activated</sub> = 11, N<sub>lost</sub> = 100, N<sub>other</sub> = 866). D, Box plots of _TP53_ and telomerase (EXTEND) scores across cancer groups. Mutation status is highlighted in orange (hypermutant) or red (ultra-hypermutant). E, Heatmap of RefSig mutational signatures for patients who have least one tumor or cell line with a hypermutant phenotype. F, Forest plot depicting the prognostic effects of _TP53_ and telomerase scores on overall survival, controlling for extent of tumor resection, LGG group, and HGG group. G, Forest plot depicting the effect of molecular subtype on overall survival of HGGs. For F and G, hazard ratios (HR) with 95% confidence intervals and p-values (multivariate Cox) are listed. Significant p-values are denoted with black diamonds. Reference groups are denoted by grey diamonds. H, Kaplan-Meier curve of HGG tumors by molecular subtype. Box plot represents 5% (lower whisker), 25% (lower box), 50% (median), 75% (upper box), and 95% (upper whisker) quantiles.

**Figure 5. Transcriptomic and immune landscape of pediatric brain tumors**
A, First two dimensions from UMAP of transcriptome data. Points are colored by broad histology. B, Heatmap of GSVA scores for Hallmark gene sets with significant differences, with tumors ordered by cancer group. C, Box plots of quanTIseq estimates of immune cell proportions in select cancer groups with N > 15 tumors. Note: other HGGs and other LGGs have immune cell proportions similar to DMG and pilocytic astrocytoma, respectively, and are not shown. D, Forest plot depicting additive effects of _CD274_ expression, immune cell proportion, and extent of tumor resection on overall survival of medulloblastoma patients. Hazard ratios (HR) with 95% confidence intervals and p-values (multivariate Cox) are listed. Significant p-values are denoted with black diamonds. Reference groups are denoted by grey diamonds. Of note, the Macrophage M1 HR was 0 (coefficient = -9.90e+4) with infinite upper and lower CIs, and thus it was not included in the figure. E, Box plot of _CD274_ expression (log<sub>2</sub> FPKM) for medulloblastomas grouped by molecular subtype. Bonferroni-corrected p-values from Wilcoxon tests are shown. Box plot represents 5% (lower whisker), 25% (lower box), 50% (median), 75% (upper box), and 95% (upper whisker) quantiles. Only stranded RNA-Seq data is plotted.

## Table Titles and Legends

**Table 1. Molecular subtypes generated through the OpenPBTA project.**
Listed are broad tumor histologies, molecular subtypes generated, and number of patients and tumors subtyped within OpenPBTA.

**Table 2. Patients with hypermutant tumors.**
Listed are patients with at least one hypermutant or ultra-hypermutant tumor or cell line. Pathogenic (P) or likely pathogenic (LP) germline variants, coding region TMB, phase of therapy, therapeutic interventions, cancer predisposition (CMMRD = Constitutional mismatch repair deficiency), and molecular subtypes are included.
