## Supplemental Information Titles and Legends

**Figure S1. OpenPBTA Project Workflow, Related to Figure 1.** 
Biospecimens and data were collected by CBTN and PNOC. 
Genomic sequencing and harmonization (orange boxes) were performed by the Kids First Data Resource Center (KFDRC). 
Analyses in the green boxes were performed by contributors of the OpenPBTA project. 
Output files are denoted in blue. 
Figure created with biorender.com.

**Figure S2. Validation of Consensus SNV calls and Tumor Mutation Burden, Related to Figures 2 and 3.**  
Correlation (A) and violin (B) plots of mutation variant allele frequencies (VAFs) comparing the variant callers (Lancet, Strelka2, Mutect2, and VarDict) used for PBTA samples. 
Upset plot (C) showing overlap of variant calls. Correlation (D) and violin (E) plots of mutation variant allele frequencies (VAFs) comparing the variant callers (Lancet, Strelka2, and Mutect2) used for TCGA samples. 
Upset plot (F) showing overlap of variant calls.
Violin plots (G) showing VAFs for Lancet calls performed on WGS and WXS from the same tumor (N = 52 samples from 13 patients).
Cumulative distribution TMB plots for PBTA (H) and TCGA (I) tumors using consensus SNV calls.

**Figure S3. Genomic instability of pediatric brain tumors, Related to Figures 2 and 3.**
(A) Oncoprint of canonical somatic gene mutations, CNVs, fusions, and TMB (top bar plot) for the top 20 genes mutated across rare CNS tumors (N < 5 each): desmoplastic infantile astrocytoma and ganglioglioma (N = 1), germinoma (N = 4), glial-neuronal NOS (N = 4), metastatic secondary tumors (N = 3), neurocytoma (N = 2), and pineoblastoma (N = 3). 
Patient sex (`germline_sex_estimate`) and tumor histology (`cancer_group`) are displayed as annotations at the bottom of each plot. 
Only samples with mutations in the listed genes are shown. 
Multiple CNVs are denoted as a complex event. 
(B) Genome-wide plot of CNV alterations by broad histology. 
Each row represents one sample. 
Box and whisker plots of number of CNV breaks (C) or SV breaks (D) by number of chromothripsis regions. 

**Figure S4. Related to Figure 3.** 
(A) Sample-specific RefSig signature weights across cancer groups ordered by decreasing Signature 1 exposure. 
(B) Proportion of Signature 1 plotted by phase of therapy for each cancer group.

**Figure S5. Related to Figure 4**.
(A) Receiver Operating Characteristic for _TP53_ classifier run on FPKM of poly-A RNA-Seq samples. 
Correlation plots for telomerase scores (EXTEND) with RNA expression of _TERT_ (B) and _TERC_ (C).First two dimensions from UMAP of sample transcriptome data with points colored by `molecular_subtype` for medulloblastoma (D), ependymoma (E), low-grade glioma (F), and high-grade diffuse astrocytic tumors (G). 

**Table S1. Related to Figure 1.** 
Table of specimens and associated metadata, clinical data, and histological data utilized in the OpenPBTA project.
(Abbreviations: CHDM = chordoma, DMG = diffuse midline glioma, HGG = high-grade glioma, ETMR = embryonal tumor with multilayer rosettes, MB = medulloblastoma, EPN = ependymoma, GNG = ganglioglioma, LGG = low-grade glioma, SEGA = subependymal giant cell astrocytoma, EWS = Ewing sarcoma, CNC = central neurocytoma, EVN = extraventricular neurocytoma, GNT = glial-neuronal tumor, CRANIO = craniopharyngioma)

**Table S2. Related to Figures 2 and 3.** 
Table of TMB, eight CNS mutational signatures, and chromothripsis events per sample.

**Table S3. Related to Figures 4 and 5.** Table of _TP53_ scores, telomerase EXTEND scores, and quanTIseq immune scores.

**Table S4. Related to Figure 1.** Table of all software and their respective versions used for the OpenPBTA project.


